Deploying and Managing (0.45.0)
1. Deployment overview
   Strimzi simplifies the process of running Apache Kafka within a Kubernetes cluster.

This guide provides instructions for deploying and managing Strimzi. Deployment options and steps are covered using the example installation files included with Strimzi. While the guide highlights important configuration considerations, it does not cover all available options. For a deeper understanding of the Kafka component configuration options, refer to the Strimzi Custom Resource API Reference.

In addition to deployment instructions, the guide offers pre- and post-deployment guidance. It covers setting up and securing client access to your Kafka cluster. Furthermore, it explores additional deployment options such as metrics integration, distributed tracing, and cluster management tools like Cruise Control and the Strimzi Drain Cleaner. You’ll also find recommendations on managing Strimzi and fine-tuning Kafka configuration for optimal performance.

Upgrade instructions are provided for both Strimzi and Kafka, to help keep your deployment up to date.

Strimzi is designed to be compatible with all types of Kubernetes clusters, irrespective of their distribution. Whether your deployment involves public or private clouds, or if you are setting up a local development environment, the instructions in this guide are applicable in all cases.

1.1. Strimzi custom resources
The deployment of Kafka components onto a Kubernetes cluster using Strimzi is highly configurable through the use of custom resources. These resources are created as instances of APIs introduced by Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs), which extend Kubernetes resources.

CRDs act as configuration instructions to describe the custom resources in a Kubernetes cluster, and are provided with Strimzi for each Kafka component used in a deployment, as well as users and topics. CRDs and custom resources are defined as YAML files. Example YAML files are provided with the Strimzi distribution.

CRDs also allow Strimzi resources to benefit from native Kubernetes features like CLI accessibility and configuration validation.

1.1.1. Strimzi custom resource example
CRDs require a one-time installation in a cluster to define the schemas used to instantiate and manage Strimzi-specific resources.

After a new custom resource type is added to your cluster by installing a CRD, you can create instances of the resource based on its specification.

Depending on the cluster setup, installation typically requires cluster admin privileges.

Note
Access to manage custom resources is limited to Strimzi administrators. For more information, see Designating Strimzi administrators.
A CRD defines a new kind of resource, such as kind:Kafka, within a Kubernetes cluster.

The Kubernetes API server allows custom resources to be created based on the kind and understands from the CRD how to validate and store the custom resource when it is added to the Kubernetes cluster.

Each Strimzi-specific custom resource conforms to the schema defined by the CRD for the resource’s kind. The custom resources for Strimzi components have common configuration properties, which are defined under spec.

To understand the relationship between a CRD and a custom resource, let’s look at a sample of the CRD for a Kafka topic.

Kafka topic CRD
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata: (1)
name: kafkatopics.kafka.strimzi.io
labels:
app: strimzi
spec: (2)
group: kafka.strimzi.io
versions:
v1beta2
scope: Namespaced
names:
# ...
singular: kafkatopic
plural: kafkatopics
shortNames:
- kt (3)
additionalPrinterColumns: (4)
# ...
subresources:
status: {} (5)
validation: (6)
openAPIV3Schema:
properties:
spec:
type: object
properties:
partitions:
type: integer
minimum: 1
replicas:
type: integer
minimum: 1
maximum: 32767
# ...
The metadata for the topic CRD, its name and a label to identify the CRD.

The specification for this CRD, including the group (domain) name, the plural name and the supported schema version, which are used in the URL to access the API of the topic. The other names are used to identify instance resources in the CLI. For example, kubectl get kafkatopic my-topic or kubectl get kafkatopics.

The shortname can be used in CLI commands. For example, kubectl get kt can be used as an abbreviation instead of kubectl get kafkatopic.

The information presented when using a get command on the custom resource.

The current status of the CRD as described in the schema reference for the resource.

openAPIV3Schema validation provides validation for the creation of topic custom resources. For example, a topic requires at least one partition and one replica.

Note
You can identify the CRD YAML files supplied with the Strimzi installation files, because the file names contain an index number followed by ‘Crd’.
Here is a corresponding example of a KafkaTopic custom resource.

Kafka topic custom resource
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaTopic (1)
metadata:
name: my-topic
labels:
strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster (2)
spec: (3)
partitions: 1
replicas: 1
config:
retention.ms: 7200000
segment.bytes: 1073741824
status:
conditions: (4)
lastTransitionTime: "2019-08-20T11:37:00.706Z"
status: "True"
type: Ready
observedGeneration: 1
/ ...
The kind and apiVersion identify the CRD of which the custom resource is an instance.

A label, applicable only to KafkaTopic and KafkaUser resources, that defines the name of the Kafka cluster (which is same as the name of the Kafka resource) to which a topic or user belongs.

The spec shows the number of partitions and replicas for the topic as well as the configuration parameters for the topic itself. In this example, the retention period for a message to remain in the topic and the segment file size for the log are specified.

Status conditions for the KafkaTopic resource. The type condition changed to Ready at the lastTransitionTime.

Custom resources can be applied to a cluster through the platform CLI. When the custom resource is created, it uses the same validation as the built-in resources of the Kubernetes API.

After a KafkaTopic custom resource is created, the Topic Operator is notified and corresponding Kafka topics are created in Strimzi.

Additional resources
Extend the Kubernetes API with CustomResourceDefinitions

Example configuration files provided with Strimzi

1.1.2. Performing kubectl operations on custom resources
You can use kubectl commands to retrieve information and perform other operations on Strimzi custom resources. Use kubectl commands, such as get, describe, edit, or delete, to perform operations on resource types. For example, kubectl get kafkatopics retrieves a list of all Kafka topics and kubectl get kafkas retrieves all deployed Kafka clusters.

When referencing resource types, you can use both singular and plural names: kubectl get kafkas gets the same results as kubectl get kafka.

You can also use the short name of the resource. Learning short names can save you time when managing Strimzi. The short name for Kafka is k, so you can also run kubectl get k to list all Kafka clusters.

Listing Kafka clusters
kubectl get k

NAME         DESIRED KAFKA REPLICAS   DESIRED ZK REPLICAS
my-cluster   3                        3
Table 1. Long and short names for each Strimzi resource
Strimzi resource	Long name	Short name
Kafka

kafka

k

Kafka Node Pool

kafkanodepool

knp

Kafka Topic

kafkatopic

kt

Kafka User

kafkauser

ku

Kafka Connect

kafkaconnect

kc

Kafka Connector

kafkaconnector

kctr

Kafka MirrorMaker

kafkamirrormaker

kmm

Kafka MirrorMaker 2

kafkamirrormaker2

kmm2

Kafka Bridge

kafkabridge

kb

Kafka Rebalance

kafkarebalance

kr

Resource categories
Categories of custom resources can also be used in kubectl commands.

All Strimzi custom resources belong to the category strimzi, so you can use strimzi to get all the Strimzi resources with one command.

For example, running kubectl get strimzi lists all Strimzi custom resources in a given namespace.

Listing all custom resources
kubectl get strimzi

NAME                                   DESIRED KAFKA REPLICAS DESIRED ZK REPLICAS
kafka.kafka.strimzi.io/my-cluster      3                      3

NAME                                   PARTITIONS REPLICATION FACTOR
kafkatopic.kafka.strimzi.io/kafka-apps 3          3

NAME                                   AUTHENTICATION AUTHORIZATION
kafkauser.kafka.strimzi.io/my-user     tls            simple
The kubectl get strimzi -o name command returns all resource types and resource names. The -o name option fetches the output in the type/name format

Listing all resource types and names
kubectl get strimzi -o name

kafka.kafka.strimzi.io/my-cluster
kafkatopic.kafka.strimzi.io/kafka-apps
kafkauser.kafka.strimzi.io/my-user
You can combine this strimzi command with other commands. For example, you can pass it into a kubectl delete command to delete all resources in a single command.

Deleting all custom resources
kubectl delete $(kubectl get strimzi -o name)

kafka.kafka.strimzi.io "my-cluster" deleted
kafkatopic.kafka.strimzi.io "kafka-apps" deleted
kafkauser.kafka.strimzi.io "my-user" deleted
Deleting all resources in a single operation might be useful, for example, when you are testing new Strimzi features.

Querying the status of sub-resources
There are other values you can pass to the -o option. For example, by using -o yaml you get the output in YAML format. Using -o json will return it as JSON.

You can see all the options in kubectl get --help.

One of the most useful options is the JSONPath support, which allows you to pass JSONPath expressions to query the Kubernetes API. A JSONPath expression can extract or navigate specific parts of any resource.

For example, you can use the JSONPath expression {.status.listeners[?(@.name=="tls")].bootstrapServers} to get the bootstrap address from the status of the Kafka custom resource and use it in your Kafka clients.

Here, the command retrieves the bootstrapServers value of the listener named tls:

Retrieving the bootstrap address
kubectl get kafka my-cluster -o=jsonpath='{.status.listeners[?(@.name=="tls")].bootstrapServers}{"\n"}'

my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap.myproject.svc:9093
By changing the name condition you can also get the address of the other Kafka listeners.

You can use jsonpath to extract any other property or group of properties from any custom resource.

1.1.3. Strimzi custom resource status information
Status properties provide status information for certain custom resources.

The following table lists the custom resources that provide status information (when deployed) and the schemas that define the status properties.

For more information on the schemas, see the Strimzi Custom Resource API Reference.

Table 2. Custom resources that provide status information
Strimzi resource	Schema reference	Publishes status information on…​
Kafka

KafkaStatus
ListenerStatus
UsedNodePoolStatus
KafkaAutoRebalanceStatus

The Kafka cluster, its listeners, node pools, and any auto-rebalances on scaling

KafkaNodePool

KafkaNodePoolStatus

The nodes in the node pool, their roles, and the associated Kafka cluster

KafkaTopic

KafkaTopicStatus

Kafka topics in the Kafka cluster

KafkaUser

KafkaUserStatus

Kafka users in the Kafka cluster

KafkaConnect

KafkaConnectStatus

The Kafka Connect cluster and connector plugins

KafkaConnector

KafkaConnectorStatus

KafkaConnector resources

KafkaMirrorMaker2

KafkaMirrorMaker2Status

The Kafka MirrorMaker 2 cluster and internal connectors

KafkaMirrorMaker

KafkaMirrorMakerStatus

The Kafka MirrorMaker cluster

KafkaBridge

KafkaBridgeStatus

The Kafka Bridge

KafkaRebalance

KafkaRebalanceStatus

The status and results of a rebalance

StrimziPodSet

StrimziPodSetStatus

The number of pods: being managed, using the current version, and in a ready state

The status property of a resource provides information on the state of the resource. The status.conditions and status.observedGeneration properties are common to all resources.

status.conditions
Status conditions describe the current state of a resource. Status condition properties are useful for tracking progress related to the resource achieving its desired state, as defined by the configuration specified in its spec. Status condition properties provide the time and reason the state of the resource changed, and details of events preventing or delaying the operator from realizing the desired state.

status.observedGeneration
Last observed generation denotes the latest reconciliation of the resource by the Cluster Operator. If the value of observedGeneration is different from the value of metadata.generation (the current version of the deployment), the operator has not yet processed the latest update to the resource. If these values are the same, the status information reflects the most recent changes to the resource.

The status properties also provide resource-specific information. For example, KafkaStatus provides information on listener addresses, and the ID of the Kafka cluster.

KafkaStatus also provides information on the Kafka and Strimzi versions being used. You can check the values of operatorLastSuccessfulVersion and kafkaVersion to determine whether an upgrade of Strimzi or Kafka has completed

Strimzi creates and maintains the status of custom resources, periodically evaluating the current state of the custom resource and updating its status accordingly. When performing an update on a custom resource using kubectl edit, for example, its status is not editable. Moreover, changing the status would not affect the configuration of the Kafka cluster.

Here we see the status properties for a Kafka custom resource.

Kafka custom resource status
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
spec:
# ...
status:
clusterId: XP9FP2P-RByvEy0W4cOEUA # (1)
conditions: # (2)
- lastTransitionTime: '2023-01-20T17:56:29.396588Z'
status: 'True'
type: Ready # (3)
kafkaMetadataState: KRaft # (4)
kafkaVersion: 3.9.0 # (5)
kafkaNodePools: # (6)
- name: broker
- name: controller
listeners: # (7)
- addresses:
- host: my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap.prm-project.svc
port: 9092
bootstrapServers: 'my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap.prm-project.svc:9092'
name: plain
- addresses:
- host: my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap.prm-project.svc
port: 9093
bootstrapServers: 'my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap.prm-project.svc:9093'
certificates:
- |
-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----

          -----END CERTIFICATE-----
      name: tls
    - addresses:
        - host: >-
            2054284155.us-east-2.elb.amazonaws.com
          port: 9095
      bootstrapServers: >-
        2054284155.us-east-2.elb.amazonaws.com:9095
      certificates:
        - |
          -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----

          -----END CERTIFICATE-----
      name: external3
    - addresses:
        - host: ip-10-0-172-202.us-east-2.compute.internal
          port: 31644
      bootstrapServers: 'ip-10-0-172-202.us-east-2.compute.internal:31644'
      certificates:
        - |
          -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----

          -----END CERTIFICATE-----
      name: external4
observedGeneration: 3 # (8)
operatorLastSuccessfulVersion: 0.45.0 # (9)
The Kafka cluster ID.

Status conditions describe the current state of the Kafka cluster.

The Ready condition indicates that the Cluster Operator considers the Kafka cluster able to handle traffic.

Kafka metadata state that shows the mechanism used (KRaft or ZooKeeper) to manage Kafka metadata and coordinate operations.

The version of Kafka being used by the Kafka cluster.

The node pools belonging to the Kafka cluster.

The listeners describe Kafka bootstrap addresses by type.

The observedGeneration value indicates the last reconciliation of the Kafka custom resource by the Cluster Operator.

The version of the operator that successfully completed the last reconciliation.

Note
The Kafka bootstrap addresses listed in the status do not signify that those endpoints or the Kafka cluster is in a Ready state.
1.1.4. Finding the status of a custom resource
Use kubectl with the status subresource of a custom resource to retrieve information about the resource.

Prerequisites
A Kubernetes cluster.

The Cluster Operator is running.

Procedure
Specify the custom resource and use the -o jsonpath option to apply a standard JSONPath expression to select the status property:

kubectl get kafka <kafka_resource_name> -o jsonpath='{.status}' | jq
This expression returns all the status information for the specified custom resource. You can use dot notation, such as status.listeners or status.observedGeneration, to fine-tune the status information you wish to see.

Using the jq command line JSON parser tool makes it easier to read the output.

Additional resources
For more information about using JSONPath, see JSONPath support.

1.2. Strimzi operators
Strimzi operators are purpose-built with specialist operational knowledge to effectively manage Kafka on Kubernetes. Each operator performs a distinct function.

Cluster Operator
The Cluster Operator handles the deployment and management of Apache Kafka clusters on Kubernetes. It automates the setup of Kafka brokers, and other Kafka components and resources.

Topic Operator
The Topic Operator manages the creation, configuration, and deletion of topics within Kafka clusters.

User Operator
The User Operator manages Kafka users that require access to Kafka brokers.

When you deploy Strimzi, you first deploy the Cluster Operator. The Cluster Operator is then ready to handle the deployment of Kafka. You can also deploy the Topic Operator and User Operator using the Cluster Operator (recommended) or as standalone operators. You would use a standalone operator with a Kafka cluster that is not managed by the Cluster Operator.

The Topic Operator and User Operator are part of the Entity Operator. The Cluster Operator can deploy one or both operators based on the Entity Operator configuration.

Important
To deploy the standalone operators, you need to set environment variables to connect to a Kafka cluster. These environment variables do not need to be set if you are deploying the operators using the Cluster Operator as they will be set by the Cluster Operator.