1.2.1. Watching Strimzi resources in Kubernetes namespaces
Operators watch and manage Strimzi resources in Kubernetes namespaces. The Cluster Operator can watch a single namespace, multiple namespaces, or all namespaces in a Kubernetes cluster. The Topic Operator and User Operator can watch a single namespace.

The Cluster Operator watches for Kafka resources

The Topic Operator watches for KafkaTopic resources

The User Operator watches for KafkaUser resources

The Topic Operator and the User Operator can only watch a single Kafka cluster in a namespace. And they can only be connected to a single Kafka cluster.

If multiple Topic Operators watch the same namespace, name collisions and topic deletion can occur. This is because each Kafka cluster uses Kafka topics that have the same name (such as __consumer_offsets). Make sure that only one Topic Operator watches a given namespace.

When using multiple User Operators with a single namespace, a user with a given username can exist in more than one Kafka cluster.

If you deploy the Topic Operator and User Operator using the Cluster Operator, they watch the Kafka cluster deployed by the Cluster Operator by default. You can also specify a namespace using watchedNamespace in the operator configuration.

For a standalone deployment of each operator, you specify a namespace and connection to the Kafka cluster to watch in the configuration.

1.2.2. Managing RBAC resources
The Cluster Operator creates and manages role-based access control (RBAC) resources for Strimzi components that need access to Kubernetes resources.

For the Cluster Operator to function, it needs permission within the Kubernetes cluster to interact with Kafka resources, such as Kafka and KafkaConnect, as well as managed resources like ConfigMap, Pod, Deployment, and Service.

Permission is specified through the following Kubernetes RBAC resources:

ServiceAccount

Role and ClusterRole

RoleBinding and ClusterRoleBinding

Delegating privileges to Strimzi components
The Cluster Operator runs under a service account called strimzi-cluster-operator, which is assigned cluster roles that give it permission to create the necessary RBAC resources for Strimzi components. Role bindings associate the cluster roles with the service account.

Kubernetes enforces privilege escalation prevention, meaning the Cluster Operator cannot grant privileges it does not possess, nor can it grant such privileges in a namespace it cannot access. Consequently, the Cluster Operator must have the necessary privileges for all the components it orchestrates.

The Cluster Operator must be able to do the following:

Enable the Topic Operator to manage KafkaTopic resources by creating Role and RoleBinding resources in the relevant namespace.

Enable the User Operator to manage KafkaUser resources by creating Role and RoleBinding resources in the relevant namespace.

Allow Strimzi to discover the failure domain of a Node by creating a ClusterRoleBinding.

When using rack-aware partition assignment, broker pods need to access information about the Node they are running on, such as the Availability Zone in Amazon AWS. Similarly, when using NodePort type listeners, broker pods need to advertise the address of the Node they are running on. Since a Node is a cluster-scoped resource, this access must be granted through a ClusterRoleBinding, not a namespace-scoped RoleBinding.

The following sections describe the RBAC resources required by the Cluster Operator.

ClusterRole resources
The Cluster Operator uses ClusterRole resources to provide the necessary access to resources. Depending on the Kubernetes cluster setup, a cluster administrator might be needed to create the cluster roles.

Note
Cluster administrator rights are only needed for the creation of ClusterRole resources. The Cluster Operator will not run under a cluster admin account.
The RBAC resources follow the principle of least privilege and contain only those privileges needed by the Cluster Operator to operate the cluster of the Kafka component.

All cluster roles are required by the Cluster Operator in order to delegate privileges.

Table 3. ClusterRole resources
Name	Description
strimzi-cluster-operator-namespaced

Access rights for namespace-scoped resources used by the Cluster Operator to deploy and manage the operands.

strimzi-cluster-operator-global

Access rights for cluster-scoped resources used by the Cluster Operator to deploy and manage the operands.

strimzi-cluster-operator-leader-election

Access rights used by the Cluster Operator for leader election.

strimzi-cluster-operator-watched

Access rights used by the Cluster Operator to watch and manage the Strimzi custom resources.

strimzi-kafka-broker

Access rights to allow Kafka brokers to get the topology labels from Kubernetes worker nodes when rack-awareness is used.

strimzi-entity-operator

Access rights used by the Topic and User Operators to manage Kafka users and topics.

strimzi-kafka-client

Access rights to allow Kafka Connect, MirrorMaker (1 and 2), and Kafka Bridge to get the topology labels from Kubernetes worker nodes when rack-awareness is used.

ClusterRoleBinding resources
The Cluster Operator uses ClusterRoleBinding and RoleBinding resources to associate its ClusterRole with its ServiceAccount. Cluster role bindings are required by cluster roles containing cluster-scoped resources.

Table 4. ClusterRoleBinding resources
Name	Description
strimzi-cluster-operator

Grants the Cluster Operator the rights from the strimzi-cluster-operator-global cluster role.

strimzi-cluster-operator-kafka-broker-delegation

Grants the Cluster Operator the rights from the strimzi-entity-operator cluster role.

strimzi-cluster-operator-kafka-client-delegation

Grants the Cluster Operator the rights from the strimzi-kafka-client cluster role.

Table 5. RoleBinding resources
Name	Description
strimzi-cluster-operator

Grants the Cluster Operator the rights from the strimzi-cluster-operator-namespaced cluster role.

strimzi-cluster-operator-leader-election

Grants the Cluster Operator the rights from the strimzi-cluster-operator-leader-election cluster role.

strimzi-cluster-operator-watched

Grants the Cluster Operator the rights from the strimzi-cluster-operator-watched cluster role.

strimzi-cluster-operator-entity-operator-delegation

Grants the Cluster Operator the rights from the strimzi-cluster-operator-entity-operator-delegation cluster role.

ServiceAccount resources
The Cluster Operator runs using the strimzi-cluster-operator ServiceAccount. This service account grants it the privileges it requires to manage the operands. The Cluster Operator creates additional ClusterRoleBinding and RoleBinding resources to delegate some of these RBAC rights to the operands.

Each of the operands uses its own service account created by the Cluster Operator. This allows the Cluster Operator to follow the principle of least privilege and give the operands only the access rights that are really need.

Table 6. ServiceAccount resources
Name	Used by
<cluster_name>-zookeeper

ZooKeeper pods

<cluster_name>-kafka

Kafka broker pods

<cluster_name>-entity-operator

Entity Operator

<cluster_name>-cruise-control

Cruise Control pods

<cluster_name>-kafka-exporter

Kafka Exporter pods

<cluster_name>-connect

Kafka Connect pods

<cluster_name>-mirror-maker

MirrorMaker pods

<cluster_name>-mirrormaker2

MirrorMaker 2 pods

<cluster_name>-bridge

Kafka Bridge pods

1.2.3. Managing pod resources
The StrimziPodSet custom resource is used by Strimzi to create and manage Kafka, Kafka Connect, and MirrorMaker 2 pods. If you are using ZooKeeper, ZooKeeper pods are also created and managed using StrimziPodSet resources.

You must not create, update, or delete StrimziPodSet resources. The StrimziPodSet custom resource is used internally and resources are managed solely by the Cluster Operator. As a consequence, the Cluster Operator must be running properly to avoid the possibility of pods not starting and Kafka clusters not being available.

Note
Kubernetes Deployment resources are used for creating and managing the pods of other components: Kafka Bridge, Kafka Exporter, Cruise Control, (deprecated) MirrorMaker 1, User Operator and Topic Operator.
1.3. Using the Kafka Bridge to connect with a Kafka cluster
You can use the Kafka Bridge API to create and manage consumers and send and receive records over HTTP rather than the native Kafka protocol.

When you set up the Kafka Bridge you configure HTTP access to the Kafka cluster. You can then use the Kafka Bridge to produce and consume messages from the cluster, as well as performing other operations through its REST interface.

Additional resources
For information on installing and using the Kafka Bridge, see Using the Kafka Bridge.

1.4. Seamless FIPS support
Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) are standards for computer security and interoperability. When running Strimzi on a FIPS-enabled Kubernetes cluster, the OpenJDK used in Strimzi container images automatically switches to FIPS mode. From version 0.33, Strimzi can run on FIPS-enabled Kubernetes clusters without any changes or special configuration. It uses only the FIPS-compliant security libraries from the OpenJDK.

Important
If you are using FIPS-enabled Kubernetes clusters, you may experience higher memory consumption compared to regular Kubernetes clusters. To avoid any issues, we suggest increasing the memory request to at least 512Mi.
1.4.1. NIST validation
Strimzi is designed to use FIPS-validated cryptographic libraries for secure communication in a FIPS-enabled Kubernetes cluster. However, it’s important to note that while Strimzi can leverage these libraries in a FIPS environment, the underlying Universal Base Images (UBI) used in Strimzi deployments may not inherently include NIST-validated binaries. This means that while Strimzi can leverage cryptographic libraries for FIPS, the specific binaries within the Strimzi container images might not have undergone NIST validation.

For more information about the NIST validation program and validated modules, see Cryptographic Module Validation Program on the NIST website.

1.4.2. Minimum password length
When running in the FIPS mode, SCRAM-SHA-512 passwords need to be at least 32 characters long. From Strimzi 0.33, the default password length in Strimzi User Operator is set to 32 characters as well. If you have a Kafka cluster with custom configuration that uses a password length that is less than 32 characters, you need to update your configuration. If you have any users with passwords shorter than 32 characters, you need to regenerate a password with the required length. You can do that, for example, by deleting the user secret and waiting for the User Operator to create a new password with the appropriate length.

Additional resources
Disabling FIPS mode using Cluster Operator configuration

What are Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS)

1.5. Document conventions
User-replaced values, also known as replaceables, are shown in with angle brackets (< >). Underscores ( _ ) are used for multi-word values. If the value refers to code or commands, monospace is also used.

For example, the following code shows that <my_namespace> must be replaced by the correct namespace name:

sed -i 's/namespace: .*/namespace: <my_namespace>/' install/cluster-operator/*RoleBinding*.yaml
1.6. Additional resources
Strimzi Overview

Strimzi Custom Resource API Reference

Using the Kafka Bridge