3. Deployment methods
   You can deploy Strimzi on Kubernetes 1.25 and later using one of the following methods:

Installation method	Description
Deployment files (YAML files)

Download the deployment files to manually deploy Strimzi components. For the greatest flexibility, choose this method.

OperatorHub.io

Deploy the Strimzi Cluster operator through the OperatorHub.io, then deploy Strimzi components using custom resources. This method provides a standard configuration and allows you to take advantage of automatic updates.

Helm chart

Use a Helm chart to deploy the Cluster Operator, then deploy Strimzi components using custom resources. Helm charts provide a convenient way to manage the installation of applications.

4. Deployment path
   You can configure a deployment where Strimzi manages a single Kafka cluster in the same namespace, suitable for development or testing. Alternatively, Strimzi can manage multiple Kafka clusters across different namespaces in a production environment.

The basic deployment path includes the following steps:

Create a Kubernetes namespace for the Cluster Operator.

Deploy the Cluster Operator based on your chosen deployment method.

Deploy the Kafka cluster, including the Topic Operator and User Operator if desired.

Optionally, deploy additional components:

The Topic Operator and User Operator as standalone components, if not deployed with the Kafka cluster

Kafka Connect

Kafka MirrorMaker

Kafka Bridge

Metrics monitoring components

The Cluster Operator creates Kubernetes resources such as Deployment, Service, and Pod for each component. The resource names are appended with the name of the deployed component. For example, a Kafka cluster named my-kafka-cluster will have a service named my-kafka-cluster-kafka.

5. Downloading deployment files
   To deploy Strimzi components using YAML files, download and extract the latest release archive (strimzi-0.45.0.*) from the GitHub releases page.

The release archive contains sample YAML files for deploying Strimzi components to Kubernetes using kubectl.

Begin by deploying the Cluster Operator from the install/cluster-operator directory to watch a single namespace, multiple namespaces, or all namespaces.

In the install folder, you can also deploy other Strimzi components, including:

Strimzi administrator roles (strimzi-admin)

Standalone Topic Operator (topic-operator)

Standalone User Operator (user-operator)

Strimzi Drain Cleaner (drain-cleaner)

The examples folder provides examples of Strimzi custom resources to help you develop your own Kafka configurations.

Note
Strimzi container images are available through the Container Registry, but we recommend using the provided YAML files for deployment.
6. Preparing for your deployment
   Prepare for a deployment of Strimzi by completing any necessary pre-deployment tasks. Take the necessary preparatory steps according to your specific requirements, such as the following:

Ensuring you have the necessary prerequisites before deploying Strimzi

Considering operator deployment best practices

Pushing the Strimzi container images into your own registry (if required)

Setting up admin roles to enable configuration of custom resources used in the deployment

Note
To run the commands in this guide, your cluster user must have the rights to manage role-based access control (RBAC) and CRDs.
6.1. Deployment prerequisites
To deploy Strimzi, you will need the following:

A Kubernetes 1.25 and later cluster.

The kubectl command-line tool is installed and configured to connect to the running cluster.

For more information on the tools available for running Kubernetes, see Install Tools in the Kubernetes documentation.

Note
Strimzi supports some features that are specific to OpenShift, where such integration benefits OpenShift users and there is no equivalent implementation using standard Kubernetes.
oc and kubectl commands
The oc command functions as an alternative to kubectl. In almost all cases the example kubectl commands used in this guide can be done using oc simply by replacing the command name (options and arguments remain the same).

In other words, instead of using:

kubectl apply -f <your_file>
when using OpenShift you can use:

oc apply -f <your_file>
Note
As an exception to this general rule, oc uses oc adm subcommands for cluster management functionality, whereas kubectl does not make this distinction. For example, the oc equivalent of kubectl taint is oc adm taint.
6.2. Operator deployment best practices
Potential issues can arise from installing more than one Strimzi operator in the same Kubernetes cluster, especially when using different versions. Each Strimzi operator manages a set of resources in a Kubernetes cluster. When you install multiple Strimzi operators, they may attempt to manage the same resources concurrently. This can lead to conflicts and unpredictable behavior within your cluster. Conflicts can still occur even if you deploy Strimzi operators in different namespaces within the same Kubernetes cluster. Although namespaces provide some degree of resource isolation, certain resources managed by the Strimzi operator, such as Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) and roles, have a cluster-wide scope.

Additionally, installing multiple operators with different versions can result in compatibility issues between the operators and the Kafka clusters they manage. Different versions of Strimzi operators may introduce changes, bug fixes, or improvements that are not backward-compatible.

To avoid the issues associated with installing multiple Strimzi operators in a Kubernetes cluster, the following guidelines are recommended:

Install the Strimzi operator in a separate namespace from the Kafka cluster and other Kafka components it manages, to ensure clear separation of resources and configurations.

Use a single Strimzi operator to manage all your Kafka instances within a Kubernetes cluster.

Update the Strimzi operator and the supported Kafka version as often as possible to reflect the latest features and enhancements.

By following these best practices and ensuring consistent updates for a single Strimzi operator, you can enhance the stability of managing Kafka instances in a Kubernetes cluster. This approach also enables you to make the most of Strimzi’s latest features and capabilities.

6.3. Pushing container images to your own registry
Container images for Strimzi are available in the Container Registry. The installation YAML files provided by Strimzi will pull the images directly from the Container Registry.

If you do not have access to the Container Registry or want to use your own container repository:

Pull all container images listed here

Push them into your own registry

Update the image names in the YAML files used in deployment

Note
Each Kafka version supported for the release has a separate image.
Container image	Namespace/Repository	Description
Kafka

quay.io/strimzi/kafka:0.45.0-kafka-3.8.0

quay.io/strimzi/kafka:0.45.0-kafka-3.8.1

quay.io/strimzi/kafka:0.45.0-kafka-3.9.0

Strimzi image for running Kafka, including:

Kafka Broker

Kafka Connect

Kafka MirrorMaker

ZooKeeper

Cruise Control

Operator

quay.io/strimzi/operator:0.45.0

Strimzi image for running the operators:

Cluster Operator

Topic Operator

User Operator

Kafka Initializer

Kafka Bridge

quay.io/strimzi/kafka-bridge:0.31.1

Strimzi image for running the Kafka Bridge

Strimzi Drain Cleaner

quay.io/strimzi/drain-cleaner:1.2.0

Strimzi image for running the Strimzi Drain Cleaner

6.4. Designating Strimzi administrators
Strimzi provides custom resources for configuration of your deployment. By default, permission to view, create, edit, and delete these resources is limited to Kubernetes cluster administrators. Strimzi provides two cluster roles that you can use to assign these rights to other users:

strimzi-view allows users to view and list Strimzi resources.

strimzi-admin allows users to also create, edit or delete Strimzi resources.

When you install these roles, they will automatically aggregate (add) these rights to the default Kubernetes cluster roles. strimzi-view aggregates to the view role, and strimzi-admin aggregates to the edit and admin roles. Because of the aggregation, you might not need to assign these roles to users who already have similar rights.

The following procedure shows how to assign a strimzi-admin role that allows non-cluster administrators to manage Strimzi resources.

A system administrator can designate Strimzi administrators after the Cluster Operator is deployed.

Prerequisites
The Strimzi admin deployment files, which are included in the Strimzi deployment files.

The Strimzi Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) and role-based access control (RBAC) resources to manage the CRDs have been deployed with the Cluster Operator.

Procedure
Create the strimzi-view and strimzi-admin cluster roles in Kubernetes.

kubectl create -f install/strimzi-admin
If needed, assign the roles that provide access rights to users that require them.

kubectl create clusterrolebinding strimzi-admin --clusterrole=strimzi-admin --user=user1 --user=user2
7. Deploying Strimzi using installation files
   Download and use the Strimzi deployment files to deploy Strimzi components to a Kubernetes cluster.

You can deploy Strimzi 0.45.0 on Kubernetes 1.25 and later.

The steps to deploy Strimzi using the installation files are as follows:

Deploy the Cluster Operator

Use the Cluster Operator to deploy the following:

Kafka cluster

Topic Operator

User Operator

Optionally, deploy the following Kafka components according to your requirements:

Kafka Connect

Kafka MirrorMaker

Kafka Bridge

Note
To run the commands in this guide, a Kubernetes user must have the rights to manage role-based access control (RBAC) and CRDs.
7.1. Deploying the Cluster Operator
The first step for any deployment of Strimzi is to install the Cluster Operator, which is responsible for deploying and managing Kafka clusters within a Kubernetes cluster. A single command applies all the installation files in the install/cluster-operator folder: kubectl apply -f ./install/cluster-operator.

The command sets up everything you need to be able to create and manage a Kafka deployment, including the following resources:

Cluster Operator (Deployment, ConfigMap)

Strimzi CRDs (CustomResourceDefinition)

RBAC resources (ClusterRole, ClusterRoleBinding, RoleBinding)

Service account (ServiceAccount)

Cluster-scoped resources like CustomResourceDefinition, ClusterRole, and ClusterRoleBinding require administrator privileges for installation. Prior to installation, it’s advisable to review the ClusterRole specifications to ensure they do not grant unnecessary privileges.

After installation, the Cluster Operator runs as a regular Deployment to watch for updates of Kafka resources. Any standard (non-admin) Kubernetes user with privileges to access the Deployment can configure it. A cluster administrator can also grant standard users the privileges necessary to manage Strimzi custom resources.

By default, a single replica of the Cluster Operator is deployed. You can add replicas with leader election so that additional Cluster Operators are on standby in case of disruption. For more information, see Running multiple Cluster Operator replicas with leader election.

7.1.1. Specifying the namespaces the Cluster Operator watches
The Cluster Operator watches for updates in the namespaces where the Kafka resources are deployed. When you deploy the Cluster Operator, you specify which namespaces to watch in the Kubernetes cluster. You can specify the following namespaces:

A single selected namespace (the same namespace containing the Cluster Operator)

Multiple selected namespaces

All namespaces in the cluster

Watching multiple selected namespaces has the most impact on performance due to increased processing overhead. To optimize performance for namespace monitoring, it is generally recommended to either watch a single namespace or monitor the entire cluster. Watching a single namespace allows for focused monitoring of namespace-specific resources, while monitoring all namespaces provides a comprehensive view of the cluster’s resources across all namespaces.

The Cluster Operator watches for changes to the following resources:

Kafka for the Kafka cluster.

KafkaConnect for the Kafka Connect cluster.

KafkaConnector for creating and managing connectors in a Kafka Connect cluster.

KafkaMirrorMaker for the Kafka MirrorMaker instance.

KafkaMirrorMaker2 for the Kafka MirrorMaker 2 instance.

KafkaBridge for the Kafka Bridge instance.

KafkaRebalance for the Cruise Control optimization requests.

When one of these resources is created in the Kubernetes cluster, the operator gets the cluster description from the resource and starts creating a new cluster for the resource by creating the necessary Kubernetes resources, such as Deployments, Pods, Services and ConfigMaps.

Each time a Kafka resource is updated, the operator performs corresponding updates on the Kubernetes resources that make up the cluster for the resource.

Resources are either patched or deleted, and then recreated in order to make the cluster for the resource reflect the desired state of the cluster. This operation might cause a rolling update that might lead to service disruption.

When a resource is deleted, the operator undeploys the cluster and deletes all related Kubernetes resources.

Note
While the Cluster Operator can watch one, multiple, or all namespaces in a Kubernetes cluster, the Topic Operator and User Operator watch for KafkaTopic and KafkaUser resources in a single namespace. For more information, see Watching Strimzi resources in Kubernetes namespaces.
7.1.2. Deploying the Cluster Operator to watch a single namespace
This procedure shows how to deploy the Cluster Operator to watch Strimzi resources in a single namespace in your Kubernetes cluster.

Prerequisites
You need an account with permission to create and manage CustomResourceDefinition and RBAC (ClusterRole, and RoleBinding) resources.

Procedure
Edit the Strimzi installation files to use the namespace the Cluster Operator is going to be installed into.

For example, in this procedure the Cluster Operator is installed into the namespace my-cluster-operator-namespace.

On Linux, use:

sed -i 's/namespace: .*/namespace: my-cluster-operator-namespace/' install/cluster-operator/*RoleBinding*.yaml
On MacOS, use:

sed -i '' 's/namespace: .*/namespace: my-cluster-operator-namespace/' install/cluster-operator/*RoleBinding*.yaml
Deploy the Cluster Operator:

kubectl create -f install/cluster-operator -n my-cluster-operator-namespace
Check the status of the deployment:

kubectl get deployments -n my-cluster-operator-namespace
Output shows the deployment name and readiness
NAME                      READY  UP-TO-DATE  AVAILABLE
strimzi-cluster-operator  1/1    1           1
READY shows the number of replicas that are ready/expected. The deployment is successful when the AVAILABLE output shows 1.

7.1.3. Deploying the Cluster Operator to watch multiple namespaces
This procedure shows how to deploy the Cluster Operator to watch Strimzi resources across multiple namespaces in your Kubernetes cluster.

Prerequisites
You need an account with permission to create and manage CustomResourceDefinition and RBAC (ClusterRole, and RoleBinding) resources.

Procedure
Edit the Strimzi installation files to use the namespace the Cluster Operator is going to be installed into.

For example, in this procedure the Cluster Operator is installed into the namespace my-cluster-operator-namespace.

On Linux, use:

sed -i 's/namespace: .*/namespace: my-cluster-operator-namespace/' install/cluster-operator/*RoleBinding*.yaml
On MacOS, use:

sed -i '' 's/namespace: .*/namespace: my-cluster-operator-namespace/' install/cluster-operator/*RoleBinding*.yaml
Edit the install/cluster-operator/060-Deployment-strimzi-cluster-operator.yaml file to add a list of all the namespaces the Cluster Operator will watch to the STRIMZI_NAMESPACE environment variable.

For example, in this procedure the Cluster Operator will watch the namespaces watched-namespace-1, watched-namespace-2, watched-namespace-3.

apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
spec:
# ...
template:
spec:
serviceAccountName: strimzi-cluster-operator
containers:
- name: strimzi-cluster-operator
image: quay.io/strimzi/operator:0.45.0
imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
env:
- name: STRIMZI_NAMESPACE
value: watched-namespace-1,watched-namespace-2,watched-namespace-3
For each namespace listed, install the RoleBindings.

In this example, we replace watched-namespace in these commands with the namespaces listed in the previous step, repeating them for watched-namespace-1, watched-namespace-2, watched-namespace-3:

kubectl create -f install/cluster-operator/020-RoleBinding-strimzi-cluster-operator.yaml -n <watched_namespace>
kubectl create -f install/cluster-operator/023-RoleBinding-strimzi-cluster-operator.yaml -n <watched_namespace>
kubectl create -f install/cluster-operator/031-RoleBinding-strimzi-cluster-operator-entity-operator-delegation.yaml -n <watched_namespace>
Deploy the Cluster Operator:

kubectl create -f install/cluster-operator -n my-cluster-operator-namespace
Check the status of the deployment:

kubectl get deployments -n my-cluster-operator-namespace
Output shows the deployment name and readiness
NAME                      READY  UP-TO-DATE  AVAILABLE
strimzi-cluster-operator  1/1    1           1
READY shows the number of replicas that are ready/expected. The deployment is successful when the AVAILABLE output shows 1.

7.1.4. Deploying the Cluster Operator to watch all namespaces
This procedure shows how to deploy the Cluster Operator to watch Strimzi resources across all namespaces in your Kubernetes cluster.

When running in this mode, the Cluster Operator automatically manages clusters in any new namespaces that are created.

Prerequisites
You need an account with permission to create and manage CustomResourceDefinition and RBAC (ClusterRole, and RoleBinding) resources.

Procedure
Edit the Strimzi installation files to use the namespace the Cluster Operator is going to be installed into.

For example, in this procedure the Cluster Operator is installed into the namespace my-cluster-operator-namespace.

On Linux, use:

sed -i 's/namespace: .*/namespace: my-cluster-operator-namespace/' install/cluster-operator/*RoleBinding*.yaml
On MacOS, use:

sed -i '' 's/namespace: .*/namespace: my-cluster-operator-namespace/' install/cluster-operator/*RoleBinding*.yaml
Edit the install/cluster-operator/060-Deployment-strimzi-cluster-operator.yaml file to set the value of the STRIMZI_NAMESPACE environment variable to *.

apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
spec:
# ...
template:
spec:
# ...
serviceAccountName: strimzi-cluster-operator
containers:
- name: strimzi-cluster-operator
image: quay.io/strimzi/operator:0.45.0
imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
env:
- name: STRIMZI_NAMESPACE
value: "*"
# ...
Create ClusterRoleBindings that grant cluster-wide access for all namespaces to the Cluster Operator.

kubectl create clusterrolebinding strimzi-cluster-operator-namespaced --clusterrole=strimzi-cluster-operator-namespaced --serviceaccount my-cluster-operator-namespace:strimzi-cluster-operator
kubectl create clusterrolebinding strimzi-cluster-operator-watched --clusterrole=strimzi-cluster-operator-watched --serviceaccount my-cluster-operator-namespace:strimzi-cluster-operator
kubectl create clusterrolebinding strimzi-cluster-operator-entity-operator-delegation --clusterrole=strimzi-entity-operator --serviceaccount my-cluster-operator-namespace:strimzi-cluster-operator
Deploy the Cluster Operator to your Kubernetes cluster.

kubectl create -f install/cluster-operator -n my-cluster-operator-namespace
Check the status of the deployment:

kubectl get deployments -n my-cluster-operator-namespace
Output shows the deployment name and readiness
NAME                      READY  UP-TO-DATE  AVAILABLE
strimzi-cluster-operator  1/1    1           1
READY shows the number of replicas that are ready/expected. The deployment is successful when the AVAILABLE output shows 1.